1 Understanding Large Language Models
This chapter covers
High-level explanations of the fundamental concepts behind large language models (LLMs)
Insights into the transformer architecture from which ChatGPT-like LLMs are derived
A plan for building an LLM from scratch
Large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT are deep neural network models developed over the last few years. They ushered in a new era for Natural Language Processing (NLP). Before the advent of large language models, traditional methods excelled at categorization tasks such as email spam classification and straightforward pattern recognition that could be captured with handcrafted rules or simpler models. However, they typically underperformed in language tasks that demanded complex understanding and generation abilities, such as parsing detailed instructions, conducting contextual analysis, or creating coherent and contextually appropriate original text. For example, previous generations of language models could not write an email from a list of keywords—a task that is trivial for contemporary LLMs.

LLMs have remarkable capabilities to understand, generate, and interpret human language. However, it's important to clarify that when we say language models "understand," we mean that they can process and generate text in ways that appear coherent and contextually relevant, not that they possess human-like consciousness or comprehension.

Enabled by advancements in deep learning, which is a subset of machine learning and artificial intelligence (AI) focused on neural networks, LLMs are trained on vast quantities of text data. This allows LLMs to capture deeper contextual information and subtleties of human language compared to previous approaches. As a result, LLMs have significantly improved performance in a wide range of NLP tasks, including text translation, sentiment analysis, question answering, and many more.

Another important distinction between contemporary LLMs and earlier NLP models is that the latter were typically designed for specific tasks; whereas those earlier NLP models excelled in their narrow 
applications, LLMs demonstrate a broader proficiency across a wide range of NLP tasks.

The success behind LLMs can be attributed to the transformer architecture which underpins many LLMs, and the vast amounts of data LLMs are trained on, allowing them to capture a wide variety of linguistic nuances, contexts, and patterns that would be challenging to manually encode.

This shift towards implementing models based on the transformer architecture and using large training datasets to train LLMs has fundamentally transformed NLP, providing more capable tools for understanding and interacting with human language.

Beginning with this chapter, we set the foundation to accomplish the primary objective of this book: understanding LLMs by implementing a ChatGPT-like LLM based on the transformer architecture step by step in code.
